Sharding and partitioning are
essential aspects of storing
time series data.
Partitioning allows data to be
subdivided into smaller, more
manageable pieces, enhancing
read and write performance.
Sharding is a strategy used to
distribute the data horizontally
across multiple nodes, thereby
improving the speed of queries
and updates.
Partitioning in CrateDB is a
powerful feature that allows you
to split up a large table into
smaller chunks or partitions.
By doing so, CrateDB minimizes
the number of records that need
to be scanned during a query,
which can significantly improve
performance, especially for
large data sets.
For time series data, you
usually use a timestamp or date
column to define partition
criteria.
For example, you can partition
data by month as shown in the
provided SQL statement for
creating the weather data table.
In this table, the month column
is a generated column that uses
the date trunk function to
extract the month from the
timestamp column.
The resulting table is
partitioned by the month column,
which means that each partition
will contain records for each
individual month only.
For quarterly, daily, or hourly
partitioning, you would need to
adjust the generated column
expression to truncate the
timestamp to a specific
interval.
New partitions are automatically
created on the first data ingest
that falls into a new partition
interval.
You do not need to manually
manage the creation of
partitions as your data grows.
Instead, CrateDB handles this
for you, creating new partitions
whenever they are needed based
on the partitioning strategy you
have defined.
Partitions in CrateDB offer a
level of granularity that allows
for individual management and
maintenance.
This means that each partition
can be backed up, closed,
deleted, or archived
individually.
This flexibility provides
efficient data management,
particularly important in
handling large time series data.
For example, if a specific
partition contains outdated or
irrelevant data, it can be
removed without impacting the
rest of the database.
Similarly, individual backups
allow for specific data
recovery, while archiving can
help optimize storage and
improve overall performance.
Sharding in CrateDB is a
fundamental concept that allows
for the horizontal scaling of
data storage and distributed
query processing.
When you create a table in CrateDB,
the data is not just stored
in a single monolithic
structure.
Instead, it is split into
shards, which are distributed
across the nodes in your
cluster.
For instance, consider the SQL
statement for creating a weather
data table.
The clustered into three shards
clause tells CrateDB to divide
each partition into three
shards.
Each partition's data will be
split across the shards, and
each Shard will hold roughly 1/3
of the data.
The number of shards is
configurable and you can decide
how many shards to create based
on the size of your data set,
the number of nodes in your
cluster and the amount of CPUs
per node.
As the data volume can grow over
time, the number of shards per
partition can be changed over
time and therefore allowing to
create more shards and more
recent partitions.
This is particularly useful when
onboarding, for example,
additional devices or weather
stations.
Another case might be gathering
measurements in a higher
frequency and therefore
generating more data than
initially planned.
Increasing the number of shards
might be necessary to ensure
consistent performance.
Sharding combined with
partitioning provides 2 levels
of data organization.
In the provided SQL
statement, the weather data
table is not only partitioned by
month, but it is also separated
into three shards.
This setup allows CrateDB to
perform operations in parallel
across different shards and
partitions, which can
significantly improve query
performance, especially for
large time series data sets and
concurrent queries.
The performance can be increased
by sharding on single node
instances as well, as queries
and aggregations can be executed
in parallel and existing
hardware is utilized in the best
way.
The number of replicas in your
CrateDB cluster is a crucial
factor that depends on the
availability of service level
agreements of your application.
It's recommended to have at
least one replica for each
Shard, but two replicas would
provide a better fault
tolerance.
CrateDB ensures that primary
and replica shards are
automatically distributed across
nodes in the cluster, enhancing
data availability and
durability.
In the event of node failures,
CrateDB automatically promotes
replica shards to primary
shards, ensuring continuous
access to your data.
This feature also allows for
rolling maintenance operations
without causing downtime as the
database remains available
through the replicas even when
some nodes are temporarily
offline for maintenance.
Replica shards are also used for
querying and aggregating data
and therefore enhance the
overall query performance.
When implementing sharding and
partitioning strategies for time
series data in CrateDB, it's
important to consider several
best practices to optimize
performance, manageability, and
scalability.
To ensure optimal performance
and resource utilization, you
should consider the total number
of shards.
This is determined by the number
of partitions multiplied by the
number of shards per partition
multiplied by the number of
replicas.
It's important to calculate this
number carefully to balance
query performance with resource
overhead.
For example, with monthly
partitioning, 3 shards per
partition and one replica, you
would have a total of 72 shards.
12 months times 3 shards, times
2 replicas.
Shard size is another crucial
factor.
The ideal size for each Shard is
between approximately 3 and 70
gigabytes.
Shards that are too small may
result in unnecessary overhead,
while shards that are too large
may lead to performance
bottlenecks due to limited
parallelization of operations.
Also, each Shard in CrateDB is
stored as an individual Lucene
index that consists of multiple
segments and has a memory
footprint.
To prevent excessive resource
consumption, it's recommended
that each node in your cluster
should not host more than 1000
shards.
This helps to maintain the
stability and responsiveness of
the cluster.
Choosing the correct
partitioning strategy means
finding a balance between the
granularity of partitions and
the overall number of partitions
which impacts the clusters
performance and manageability.
Some factors to be considered are:
1. The amount of time
series data.
Consider the volume of data you
expect to ingest into your CrateDB
cluster.
Larger data sets may benefit
from more granular partitioning
to prevent any single partition
from becoming too large, which
could slow down query
performance.
2. The retention period:
That means the period of time
you need to keep the data
affects the number of
partitions.
For longer retention periods,
you may need more partitions to
keep the data set manageable.
3. The size of your CrateDB
cluster.
That means the number of nodes
influences your partitioning
strategy.
More nodes can handle a larger
number of partitions,
distributing the load and
allowing for parallel
processing.
However, too many partitions
across too few nodes can lead to
excessive overhead.
Let's consider an example with a
three node CrateDB cluster.
If you estimate to collect 700
megabytes of data each day, this
translates to almost 5 gigabytes
of data per week, 21 gigabytes
of data per month, and 253
gigabytes of data per year.
Given these parameters and one
year retention.
You could choose to partition
your data yearly.
For more than one terabyte of
data, one should consider
monthly partitions.
The ideal partitioning strategy
for time series data in CrateDB
is not static.
It should evolve as your data
volume grows and your
requirements change.
The potential deletion or
archiving of data also
influences the partitioning
strategy.
For example, if you want to
delete large chunks of data, it
is beneficial to partition data
accordingly and drop for example
monthly partitions instead of
executing delete statements.
When configuring sharding for
time series data, it is
important to consider several
factors such as the expected
amount of data, number of
partitions, and cluster
configuration including number
of nodes and the number of CPUs
per node.
A good rule of thumb is to have
as many shards as there are CPUs
in the cluster.
This increases the chance to get
a maximum of distribution and
parallelization of queries.
In our example, let's consider a
three node cluster where each
node has three CPUs.
The total amount of data over a
course of the year is predicted
to be around 253 gigabytes, and
we decided to have one
partition.
In this situation, we can choose
to have nine shards, resulting
in three shards per node, where
each shard contains 28 gigabytes
of data.
It is worth mentioning that it
is important to monitor the
performance of your cluster as
data grows and adjust the number
of shards as needed to ensure
optimal performance over time.
CrateDB also supports high
availability, which is crucial
for maintaining uninterrupted
service and preventing data loss.
In CrateDB, replication is
configurable on a per table
basis.
This gives you the flexibility
to set the level of replication
that best suits your data size
and workload.
In our example, one replica is
created per Shard.
This ensures that a copy of your
data is always available,
enhancing the reliability of
your database and safeguarding
your data against potential
failures.